---
title: The Experience of Aiding Teachers, as a Teaching Assistant
description: A description and reflection of my job as a teaching assistant for UBC's APSC160 course in a 2016 March blog post.
---

"By the way, I was wondering if I could be a TA next term?"

Way back in October, before the first midterm of APSC 160, Introduction to Computation in Engineering Design, I came up with some lame question to ask the instructor, Hassan Khosravi, during his office hours. It was the only office hours (office hour?) I ever went to this entire year, and I felt pretty nervous. For one, I didn't understand the concept at all; it seemed absurd to dedicate an hour of time every week just to meet with students. On the one hand, you'd expect nobody to go: students can ask questions during lectures (lecture?), on an online forum specifically created to answer questions about APSC 160, to their friends, to Google, etc. On the other hand, you'd expect too many people to go: if one question takes fifteen minutes to answer, one office hour can only help four students a week, and there were over 500 students taking the course!

Of course, the reason I went to office hours was to become a TA.

<!--more-->

TAs are Teaching Assistants, students who help the prof with the more mundane responsibilities of university courses—invigilating exams, preparing demonstrations, monitoring lectures, holding their own office hours, and of course, marking. Profs need TAs, especially for huge undergrad courses, because marking 500 final exams is not something you want a professional researcher to waste their time doing. TAs need teaching assistantship positions because they pay quite well for an part-time job, $14.90 as an undergrad TA, $29.87 as a MSc student, and $31.04 as a PhD candidiate at UBC. (Meanwhile, the University of Toronto pays $42.47 to undergrad TAs!) UBC undergrad TAs typically fill out timesheets and are paid by hours worked, while graduate TAs are hired to work a certain number of hours per week and are paid a fixed salary for the entire term. Unfortunately, that certain number is 12 hours per week, so even at $31.04 an hour, graduate TAs barely make anything at all compared to a full-time job, but hey! Students are supposed to study, and TAing is a great part-time thing to do. I think all TAs at U of T are paid a fixed salary too, but they're frequently overworked and so their actual hourly wage is much, much less than $42.47, hence the massive TA strike there last summer.

It's not hard to become a TA, especially for UBC's Computer Science department. Definitely a majority of students who apply to become a TA will get the job. Because enrollment is skyrocketing as people realize that compsci skills actually lead to jobs, demand for TAs is just overwhelming too. For example, I swear UBC's general introductory compsci course, CPSC 110, has over 50 TAs. APSC 160 is an engineering-specific introductory compsci course, which focusses much more on the syntax of C programming than on the design patterns that underlie all of programming. It's also the only compsci course I've ever taken at UBC, and the compsci course that I decided I would TA, even as a first-year student.

Perhaps that's why I tried so hard to burn an impression into Hassan's mind, first by visiting his office hours, and then by leaving both 90-minute midterms as soon as the half-hour "no-leaving limit" passed, because I had no prior job experience as a first-year student. Maybe also because I thought that students were personally selected by teachers to assist them. "Nope," Hassan told me when I went into his office that day, "There's an application process you have to fill out. Best of luck, though." In retrospect, of course there was an application process! TAs usually don't apply to teach one particular course; their responsibilities are about the same in every course, so the department collects all the applications and distributes the applicants to the courses that need them. Unfortunately for me, the only course whose content I understood well was APSC 160, seeing as, again, it was the only compsci course I've taken.

The applications are straightforward. Usually, no resumes are needed, just a class transcript and availability, and sometimes not even that. For the UBC CS TA application, all you need is to list your prior work experience, explain your general qualifications, and rate how qualified you are and how interested you are for each course. For the UBC Math TA application, all you need is to list your prior TA positions. But for the UBC Music TA application, you need reference letters from three different faculty members. But I don't even know three different faculty members in any of the faculties I take courses in!

<hr />

So eventually, I got the job.

I found out even before exam season ended, and spent the rest of December stressed out about all the administrivia around actually having a job. They emailed me a form to sign up for UBC's direct deposit, and stressed that "without doing this you CANNOT be hired to work", so I filled out the form and tried to submit it before the second term started in January. Turns out UBC Payroll didn't have any of my info in their database yet, and I ended up going to their complex—stressed on the first syllable—three more times, once to actually submit it, once more to make sure that I actually did submit it, and finally once because I thought I had to submit my timesheets there. Then I never went back again!

The entire paperwork process was surprisingly relaxed. Nobody seems to care how late any of your formal documents are, such as timesheets or that so-important direct deposit form. The only way you get paid as an hourly undergrad TA is by writing down how many hours you work on a timesheet, getting your prof to sign it, and submitting that twice a month. Right before the deadline, the CS department sends out an email reminding you to fill out the timesheet, so there's no reason for anyone to submit it late, but myself and many fellow TAs are often tardy anyway. When we were marking the second midterm, half a dozen of us brought our timesheets to be signed by the prof, but forgot to actually do that until marking was over. Unfortunately, the timesheets were due at 12:00, and we finished marking at 1:30 or something, so we all ended up submitting them late. An interesting thing I learned that day was that apparently, there are numbers on the timesheet corresponding to the day of the month, and you're only supposed to write down your hours on the days you actually worked. I didn't know because the sample timesheet they gave me, which I then dutifully photocopied to create all my actual timesheets, was itself photocopied and darkened so as to hide the numbers entirely! Which again, shows how chill the whole process is, when nobody even questions how I spent 12 hours marking in one day.

I was also surprised at how... experienced my fellow TAs were, for an introductory programming course. Needless to say, I was the only first-year, and I think there were only three or four third-year students. Everyone else was almost done their undergrad degree, or was already in a Masters or PhD program! That just goes to show how important teaching assistantships are for students faced with crushing debt (ok, maybe not at UBC) and with zero opportunity for full-time employment while pursuing their degree. $372 a week from a part-time job without an additional commute is frankly quite alright.

<hr />

What TAs do really depend on what department and ultimately, what subject they TA. (To be honest, I'm not sure what "TA" as a verb is supposed to stand for, but the construction exists.) For example, chemistry TAs may prepare in-class demonstrations for the prof to show off; literature TAs may lead weekly small discussion groups for participation marks; music TAs may teach an entire musicianship course without the actual prof ever showing up! But as a CS TA, all I really did was mark labs.

There are 9 labs in APSC 160, worth a total of 16% of the final grade. We CS TAs mark the first six, and ECE TAs mark the last three for whatever reason; it's weird. We call them labs, but they're really more like in-class open-book quizzes—every week, students show up at the computer lab, are given a program to implement in C, and submit their implementation within three hours. These programs range in difficulty from the first lab, "Copy this code and replace the sample name with your actual name," to the sixth lab, "Find the number of numbers in this array that lie between the given values." Yep, it's an introductory course after all, for engineers, not computer scientists! Since you can even bring your textbook to the lab room, the minority of people who don't get above 90% generally have little idea what's going on and fail the lab.

Marking labs was boring, insanely mind-numbing and tedious. There was a bit of variety in that every lab section had a slightly modified program to implement, and every few submissions I'd spend ten minutes hacking at someone's code to make it compile, but honestly, that variety was more annoying than interesting. Thankfully, I only had to mark three sections, or just over 70 labs a week, while all the other marking TAs had four sections each. I probably spent less time on marking than on fixing uncompilable labs and making <a href="https://github.com/eyqs/grd/releases/">my autograder script</a> to automatically compile, run tests on, and highlight key words of each lab...

The marks all have to be manually entered into UBC's <a href="http://elearning.ubc.ca/connect/">custom Blackboard Learn system</a> by manually checking boxes on rubrics for every student for every lab, manually. Based on my student experiences with Blackboard, I'm not surprised. For APSC 160 in particular, the quality of rubrics differs sharply between different labs, probably a reflection of how many different profs taught and edited the course over the past decade. The one criterium that stays constant is a 5% deduction if the submission doesn't include a student number, email address, and the purpose of the program, which somebody always forgets. In every one of my sections. Every single week. That's why I said most people get above 90%, and not 100%, because the vast majority of deductions are due to criteria like not including the purpose, using meaningless identifiers, and #including &lt;math.h&gt; when it's not needed. I don't disagree with these—good coding practices are good—but it's interesting how many points someone can get for submitting well-formatted boilerplate.

Other TAs got to do fun stuff like invigilate midterms, supervise the lab quizzes, and walk around during lectures to encourage people to pay attention and participate. Although I feel it takes more concentration to mark labs, it takes much more time to supervise them, and lectures too. That's great for graduate TAs who have to work for 12 hours a week as part of their appointment—I know 12 hours of marking labs would destroy me—and good for the students too, because grads are more mature and responsible than me, and I would feel really awkward walking around telling my classmates what to do. Maybe that's why I was put on marking.

Other than marking the labs, all the TAs had to come together to mark the midterms and final exam, and that's where I had the advantage after many weeks of work experience! I also held some office hours early in the term, but nobody ever came, and I felt guilty for getting free money. Finally, I was also responsible for answering questions on <a href="https://piazza.com/">Piazza</a>, a platform to create online Q&A forums. I was supposed to encourage students to respond, so I tried to wait at least six hours before responding to any questions. This led to me responding to very few questions!

The whole experience was quite interesting, although the marking grunt work was not. I'm glad for the opportunity as my first real job and especially thankful to Hassan for being a great, laid-back prof to work with. I've already applied to be a TA for the summer term, and hopefully I'll spend less time marking next time around!
