---
title: The May Exams: My Awful Years in IB's Education, Xenial, Authoritative, Maybe Superfluous
description: A brief summary of the three years I spent in IB before the year I wrote this 2016 May blog post.
---

I was going to post something here but then it was too late, so I'll post a temporary thing here until I shed enough of my laziness to talk about my three years in International Baccalaureate related programs.

ts;dr: I got rejected from every university I applied for except for UBC, I got really mad at IB for forcing me to waste all my time studying humanities, I realized that the time-wasting was done by me not IB, ultimately I guess IB is OK? It teaches you to have a welcoming international perspective, it has broad comprehensive learning outcomes, but maybe some subjects have excessively redundant elements.

<!--more-->

In the International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme (I still don't know what the extra 'me' is for), up to 80% of your final grade, depending on the subject, is based on formal exams written at the end of the program. These exams usually happen in May, which is why the May Exams are often unjustifiably the most dreaded times of an IB student's life. My last exam last year, before I hopped on a plane the day after, was Math HL Paper 3, during which the fire alarm rang, but nobody gave it a care because we all thought that paper would be ridiculously hard. Our IB coordinator, the venerable Dr. Gabbott, stood firm in the face of loud administative petitions and we wasted no time in evacuating the exam hall because we didn't. Thankfully, either it was a false alarm or the fire just never made it to us, and I survived to pen this poem for the English teacher that supervised us that day.

Reeling and reeling from the alarm of the fire<br />
The examined overhear the examiner;<br />
Gabbott departs; the kids do as they're told;<br />
For IBO produced these ordered rules,<br />
The ink-stained scripts are turned, and everywhere<br />
The candidates' final sentence is found;<br />
The best sans contradiction, while the worst<br />
May have but one or two discrepancies.<br />

Surely some celebration is at hand;<br />
Surely the May Assessment's off my hands.<br />
The May Assessments! Hardly are those words out<br />
When one last image from the centre in Cardiff<br />
Troubles my sight: someone commands in a cellar<br />
A team of science teachers, and the head has a plan,<br />
A markscheme so pitiless once begun,<br />
That'll make students' souls sigh, while all about them<br />
Kneel agents of the malignant IBO.<br />
The darkness drops again; but now I know<br />
That fifteen years of idle games and dreams<br />
Were put in order by three years of struggle,<br />
And UBC, its homework come down en masse,<br />
After IB, what's there left for concern?<br />
