---
title: Why Hacking Hardware is Hacking Hard, for Weary Students
description: Two stories of my experiences in the only two hackathons I've had before this 2016 April blog post.
---

(Spoiler: it's the student's fault.)

Let's start with two stories.

<a href="https://www.nwhacks.io/">nwHacks</a>, end of February. I got together with a bunch of fellow <a href="http://snowbots.ca/">UBC Snowbots</a> software team members, all first-years, all hella smart, myself excluded. We met up over the reading break to brainstorm ideas for about fifteen minutes and decided that we would do a hardware hack with the newest, coolest NFC technology. Little did we know how old and warm (uh, not new and not cool) it would be...

<!--more-->

In preparation for the hackathon, we all brought our coolest hardware, myself excluded, which was basically a Raspberry Pi with a wifi dongle and Bluetooth module, and an Arduino Genuino Hackerino Uno with a NFC card reader/writer and Mifare Classic tag. The first few hours were uneventful. I woke up late, missed the free lunch, and showed up late to the opening ceremony. We thought we had all the cool hardware we'd ever need and didn't even think about snatching some of the actual cool sponsored hardware, including 12 Oculus Rifts, 24 Myos, and 20 Pebbles. And we could've just taken lots of the last one off the ground! Instead, we got straight down to work trying to set up a wifi connection through the Pi and start a project in Android Studio.

That took us until dinner. The two guys who knew what they were doing didn't know how to set up wifi from the Pi (because face it, who would?), and the rest of us didn't know what we were doing and hey, the organizers did joke during the opening ceremony that most of the weekend would be spend getting Android Studio to start. Ultimately, we did manage to do both, and everybody was happy except me, because I had no idea how wifi worked on Arch Linux and never bothered to actually learn about networking, so while everyone else was happily SSH'd into the Pi, I didn't even know what SSH was and was too embarrassed to admit that heck, I had absolutely no idea what was happening.

Also, I managed to break Android Studio's simulator with "ERROR; Could not create the SDL2 window: GLX is not supported". No, nothing Google suggests fixes it. Yes, I tried them all. And yes, I'm finally completely reinstalling everything, tomorrow.

After a mediocre dinner, we hunkered down to work on the actual app. We had figured out what we'd do with all our hardware: the user would install our app, walk into a museum or school or whatever, and put their phone on a special table, where it would read an NFC tag, which sends it the UUID of a Bluetooth module, which sends it a map of the place when our app automatically uses the UUID sent by the NFC tag to connect to the Bluetooth module. Did that make sense? It didn't make sense to me either, and I came up with like half of it! The end goal was so that you could have a map of whatever building you're in immediately, without wifi or data, just by dropping your phone on a table for a second. All of that seemed perfectly doable to us, but we hadn't counted on how hard and how weary hacking on hardware would be. They also didn't realize that I had absolutely no idea what I was talking about, yet I was still talking about it.

I went to help the smartest guy in our team debug the Mifare tag, while the others tried to integrate Bluetooth support into the boilerplate app we had. Turns out the Mifare tag somehow got bricked, and its first two sectors had become meaningless garbage. Thankfully, I had many months of training with <a href="https://ubcorbit.com/">UBC Orbit's</a> hardware team in deciphering poorly-translated data sheets and packet structures. Turns out I had absolutely no idea what I was doing there too, but rest assured it was hard, weary, and deserves a separate post of its own. By midnight, the guy managed to unbrick the tag somehow (don't ask me, I have absolutely no idea), and was able to store the UUID of the Bluetooth module into the Mifare tag memory.

Unfortunately, try as we might, none of our phones could read the actual contents of the tag, especially not mine, since I had absolutely no... phone. After many fruitless false starts, we finally realized that the Mifare Classic NFC tag was just not compatible with basically every popular modern phone! One guy just straight up gave up and headed home to finish his homework. On the app side of things, they were able to send a picture of a happy face from laptop to Pi and back&mdash;given that the smiley face was under 2 kB in size. A 48x48 icon would get chopped off in random places, and since the Bluetooth module only supported serial communication, we had no way to piece it together again.

2 am. We changed track, tossed out ideas at random. nwHacks is a 24-hour hackathon, and we still had six or so hours left till submission. We still had time to make creative and unique games like cigar.io, Flabby Bird, or 4096. We could plaster tables with giant QR codes and scan those in instead, since the whole point of the NFC tag was just to send 32 hexadecimal digits, except that still wouldn't fix our Bluetooth's inability to send a medium-sized icon, but we worked on QR codes with ZXing for a while anyway before I finally had my spark of inspiration: I would connect the NFC card reader to the Arduino, then connect it to my laptop to transfer data between them!

I had absolutely no idea what I was doing and fried the Arduino instead.

5 am, many Red Bulls and Soylents later. The NFC tag is incompatible, the Arduino is fried, the wifi on the Pi disconnects, and now, the app suddenly can't even receive smiley faces. Even 300-character sentences are garbled.

At the end, we had an app that could send tweets&mdash;sometimes&mdash;to a Raspberry Pi, which would just bounce the tweet back. At the end, we spent an hour and $30 going to London Drugs to buy a legit Bluetooth module that could send more than a tweet without disconnecting, only to find out that we had no idea how to configure it to work with our app anyway. At the end, all but one of us left, even before the free lunch, and it wasn't me. At the end, I bought a new Arduino Genuino Sorryrino Uno for my friend, and blamed everything on the hardware.

<hr />

Two months later, <a href="http://www.fishackathon.co/">Fishackathon</a>, end of April.

I got together with a bunch of high school students I didn't know, all hella smart, myself excluded (since I'm not a high school student). We didn't meet up beforehand to do anything but one guy had a working prototype so everyone else decided to take the time to study physics, myself included. Little did we know... actually, we basically knew how it was going to turn out: the guy with the working app would win the hackathon, the guys who were studying physics would ace their exams, and everyone else would leave after the free food and tour.

But I did try, somewhat! One prompt was for a hack that would "pull information directly from all kinds of freely available internet sources", so I discovered the magic of <a href="https://www.crummy.com/software/BeautifulSoup/">Beautiful Soup</a> and did pull like two megabytes of data from the <a href="https://www.wcpfc.int/record-fishing-vessel-database">WCPFC</a>, <a href="https://www.iattc.org/VesselRegister/VesselList.aspx?List=RegVessels&Lang=ENG">IATTC</a>, <a href="https://www.ccamlr.org/en/compliance/licensed-vessels">CCAMLR</a>, and other such wonderful freely available internet sources that didn't export their data as freely available spreadsheets for whatever reason. After about four hours of literally crawling through the source code trying to make sense of it all, I gave up, left early, and studied real hard for my PHYS 158 final exam the next day at 8:30 am.

Was it worth it? Yes. The food was awesome and the Vancouver Aquarium, which hosted the event, was amazing. The sponsors were incredibly supportive and there were tons of mentors to help us along every step of the hacking. Also, I got to tour the aquarium for the first time in a decade, and I got to touch live manta rays! Rather, the live manta rays touched me, but the point is that I loved it all.

Was it worth it for them? No. I may have come into the hack with good intentions, but I left as a freeloading jerk with no contributions whatsoever. At the end, I finally realized that I had absolutely no idea about everything and anything at all, and had no place in any hackathons or even any team-based events until I had made my hads otherwise.

<hr />

At the time, I blamed hardware for everything that went wrong at nwHacks. If only we didn't have a Mifare Classic tag that was incompatible with everyone's phones; if only we had a USB OTG cable to connect our phones to the Arduino that could read the Mifare Classic tag using the NFC tag reader; if only we had an Arduino Genuino Bakerino Uno that wasn't fried; if only we had a Bluetooth module that could directly send images rather than converting them to serial; if only we knew how to integrate our expensive Bluetooth module into our app; if only setting up wifi on the Pi took less than half a day.

But it wasn't hardware making us weary and definitely not making anyone hard. It was me and my utter failure to have absolutely any idea about anything. Heck, I've never coded in Java in my life, although that wouldn't have made a difference anyway since I couldn't even open the simulator in Android Studio. But my teammates expected in me what standards they held themselves to, and I just couldn't meet it.

Hardware isn't hard. Like anything else, working with hardware is a skill to be learned and developed over time. I saw it in UBC Orbit, the difference between third-years and graduating students, who had maybe two or three extra courses on hardware, tops. But me, I don't have that skill, that experience and knowledge. I don't have anything at all.

After the Fishackathon, which involved no hardware whatsoever, it struck me that not only do I not have the experience and knowledge needed to properly participate in any hackathons, I also don't have the drive to finish anything. I started <a href="https://github.com/eyqs/ish/releases">my Fishackathon project</a> aiming for at least a finished product, and ended it in such shame that I specifically requested the <a href="https://education.github.com/pack">GitHub Student Developer Pack</a> just so that I could make that repository private.

So that's what I'll be fixing, this summer, starting today. My goal is to have a hackathon, by myself, every Sunday from now until Labour Day until I know what I'm doing, until I know what's going on, until I get that experience and knowledge and drive and can actually contribute to a team. I'm tired of being that one guy who only knows how to code in Python, who has no idea what hash tables are because they're called dictionaries, and who has never cared about memory management ever. I'm tired of being that one guy without a phone who can't make an Android app because my Android Studio can't run its simulator, who can't make an iPhone app because I can't afford a MacBook, and who can't make a website because I've never learned about networking, and JavaScript, and PHP and node.js and Rails and Scala and Django and Angular and Flask and Tornado and Meteor and...

Here's my tentative schedule, just to set something in stone:

1. a working Arch Linux installation (May)
2. a sudoku solver in Racket
3. a sokoban solver in Scheme
4. a nethack clone in ANSI C
5. a shorthand parser in MATLAB/Octave
6. a tycoon game in C++ (June)
7. a website in all the popular frameworks
8. a terminal emulator in JavaScript (July)
9. a database thing in SQL
10. a graphics thing in OpenGL
11. an iPhone app in Swift (August)
12. an Android app in Java

Of course, the real crux of this schedule is that C++ in the middle, a C++ that I've never really sat down to master and a C++ I'll need for the competitive programming problems that I'll have to start getting into again. Everything else, the projects, the languages, they're really all for fun. But hopefully, the experience I'll gain from starting all those projects, the knowledge I'll get from learning all those languages, hopefully they'll come together to give me the drive I need to continue whatever this post was about, it's late i forgot
