---
title: "Lacking a Coding Interview: The Tragedy of My First Real Interview"
description: A tragedy of epic proportions as I bomb my interviews in 2016 September.
---

I recently had my Google winternship phone internviews. The first went terribly; the interviewer called ten minutes late, I needed hints to get through every step of the way, and I had to cut the interviewer off mid-speech after fifty minutes because my next interview was starting. Thoroughly demoralized, I hardly fared better during the second, and as I stumbled outside, bewildered, I couldn't help but think that I was lacking.

"Lacking what?" I thought to myself in a daze, and like a fifth-grade poem it suddenly clicked into place. "Lacking a coding interview," I repeated silently, again and again, as I drifted into bus-induced unconsciousness, "I'm lacking a coding interview&hellip;"

<!--more-->

Back at home, thoroughly refreshed from my afternoon commute-cum-nap, I realized that I had no idea what I meant. But I am overdue for a September post, so I might as well entertain myself. What could it mean, to lack a coding interview? We can take it literally. Again, I got my two coding interviews, I flubbed them&mdash;and now I want a third one. The third interview is the interview I lack, and the interview I'll need to ace in order to have any shot at a Google winternship. To be honest, I'm perversely glad that I didn't make it; host-matching takes time, so if I wait until rejection, I won't be able to find another job, but if I accept another job instead, I'll have to live with the feeling of having possibly lost a Google winternship not due to skill but due to patience.

### Lacking a Coding Interview

The previous interpretation's like regular chips: slightly salty and very boring. If you want some more flavour, try extra salt and pepper: I'm lacking a coding interview because my interview wasn't really about coding. Although I've read the non-disclosure agreement and don't think it says anything about revealing interview questions, I won't out of human decency. Instead, imagine yourself in my shoes.

You wake up with a headache and a light fever. Your first class's at 8:00 a.m. and the two consecutive Google interviews you've spent all night studying for start at 1:00 p.m. What time is it now? Thanks to your useless last-minute cramming last night, it's 11:00 a.m., your second class has already started, and you're still shivering in your bed wishing for the summer that ended last week. You gulp down a brunch, throw a handful of grapes and (grape) tomatoes in a Ziploc bag, and dash out the door before you realize that since there's no way you'll make it in time for anything anyway, there's actually no reason to hurry at all! You run to catch the bus anyway and miss it by a red light.

It's 12:30 p.m. and you're in the co-op office, ironically skipping the mandatory co-op workshop. The private interview booths are too pristine, and you don't want to cost anyone a job because some boss has a deadly allergy to grape stains, so you're in the waiting room eating grapes (and (grape) tomatoes). You've been preparing for these interviews <del>for the past two days</del> all your life, and you can definitely feel butterflies fluttering (actually grapes (and (grape) tomatoes) bouncing) in your stomach. But you've already gone through everything in the prep guide they sent you. Data structures? Yep. Algorithms? Yep. Heaps? Yep. Hashtables? Just implemented one the day before. Trees? After five hours of double rotating AVL trees and manually repainting red-black trees, yep. Graphs? My adjacency lists and matrices are exception-safe. Recursion? Yep. Sorting? [Yep.](https://github.com/eyqs/alg/blob/master/cpp/alg/sorts.hpp)

Operating systems? Nope.

You have absolutely no idea how computers or compilers work. You know what logic gates are, but you can't imagine how any number of them could possibly coalesce into a CPU, or ALU, or GPU. You know that programming languages store things in memory and pointers tell you where they are in memory, but you've never heard of registers, or virtual memory, or the memory hierarchy. You know that computers run processes on threads, but you think locks are for doors, monitors are for Windows, and semaphores are delicious snacks. But you're only a second year student, and you doubt that any university in North America even offers operating systems courses in first year. Is that really your fault?

Actually, I think it is. It shows that you're not really as passionate about technology as you say you are; a true geek would learn everything about mutexes and caches even before entering university! I think that Google really is looking for people of that calibre, and it's unfortunately a bar you don't meet.

But enough of that. It's been half an hour, and the interviewer's about to call you any time now. You eat the last of your grapey fruits, open up the Google Doc, and wait. And wait. And wait&hellip;

After what must have been at least three eternities of checking and second-guessing the phone number you sent, your interviewer finally calls you at 1:10 p.m., 10 minutes late, jumping right in to skip your prerehearsed about-myself-telling: "I'm just reading through your resume right now," and as you scramble to remember what you wrote a month ago, "Tell me about this 'ftn' framework you used to make your rogue game."

"That, ftn," you stammer, "is, [the name, of my game](https://github.com/eyqs/ftn/releases)."

"Oh, so what did you use to make it?"

"C."

Off to a rocky awkward silence. Before the interviewer can delve even deeper into your questionable naming practices, you rudely interrupt to ask for a technical question. To ask for a coding interview.

"Sure, well, what language do you use?"

"C++."

"Hmm&hellip; a C++ question, huh? Well, let me see&hellip;"

Your heart is beating out of your chest. You know that you're already losing the interviewer; your answers are short and choppy, you forgot all your elegantly crafted chains of justification and explanation linking your silly keyboard typing tutor script to the newest and coolest at Google, and you can barely understand the Google Hangout on the other end through your 1990s landline on speaker. At this point, you just pray that they don't ask an operating systems question.

They don't. It's a bitwise manipulation question, one that you saw the exact answer to when you were studying the bitmanip chapter of *Cracking the Coding Interview* last night, because you had no idea what bitmanip was. You confidently code out the answer on Google Docs. But it's wrong! The interviewer didn't mention what type the input was, and it's actually a C++ template question. You timidly code out the answer on Google Docs. But it's wrong! You forgot your C++ template syntax, and the interviewer walks you through the actual solution, character by character.

That's not the end of the first question, but it's already 12:40 and your interview should end in 5 minutes. The interviewer extends the question, so that you have to call your previous solution in a loop. You doubtfully code out the answer on Google Docs. But it's wrong! It's too slow and its concept is fundamentally flawed. Why don't you make a lookup table instead? You fearfully code out the answer on Google Docs. But it's wrong! You forgot that you're coding a template function. How do you get the bounds of the lookup table? You start typing something. But it's wrong! So you admit you have no idea and create a symbolic constant instead. But it's wrong! The interviewer walks you through the actual constant in &lt;climits&gt;, character by character. You move your fingers towards the keyboard. But it's wrong! The lookup table is too slow and its fundamentals are conceptually flawed. Why don't you break up the keys and make a smaller lookup table instead? You start thinking. But it's wrong! So you admit you have no idea how to break up keys and use a keyword operator from the days of C. But it's wrong! The interviewer lectures at you for five minutes about the dependence of char sizes on architecture, and that's when you realize that what you're facing was an operating systems question all along.

You break down. But it's wrong! The broken-up lookup table violates locality of reference. Why don't you break down the keys even more? But it's wrong! The broken-down lookup table is still too large to fit in L1 cache, and it's also broken down. Why don't you use a built-in function present in all modern Intel processors? But it's wrong! So you admit you have no idea how to include processor guards, thank your interviewer, and hang up, because it's 1:59 p.m., your next interview is starting in 1 minute, you didn't even make it to the second question, and you already ran out of tissues.

### Cracking the Coding Interview

I didn't feel that that was a *coding* interview. I wrote ten lines of code and spent the rest of the interview trying to recall bits of trivia about template syntax, standard library constants, average cache sizes, and Intel microprocessor instructions. Due to all the hints I requested, none of the final code was my original work. The interviewer could have gotten the same result out of a deaf four-fingered proboscis monkey, and probably in less time too. This wasn't the kind of interview I was prepared for.

But in reality, there did not exist a kind of interview I was prepared for. This was my first ever technical interview, and despite all the gossip floating around online, I really had no idea what to expect. (The only other job interview I've ever had was for an amusement park. The manager asked me when I was available, and I naively said I was available anytime, in the hopes that my flexibility would lead to a job. It did, so my flexibility got me a job as an on-call rides operator and then they never called me ever again. I did get $50 from training and a free hat, though!)

So I lack yet another coding interview; I lack that third interview, I lacked the coding in my first interview, and I lack all the practice coding interviews I should have done instead of making dumb rogue games with dumb names. One of my main selling points was my decent performance at the [ACM-ICPC Pacific Northwest Regionals](https://icpc.baylor.edu/regionals/finder/pacific-northwest-2015/) last year, but after second term rolled around, I stopped going to practices altogether. Since I was paying for a U-Pass anyway, I had all the reason to go in summer, but didn't. And now, as 18th place in this year's tryouts, I might not even make the 15-person team.

Instead of practising with the ACM team, in person with a friend, or on [HackerRank](https://www.hackerrank.com/) and [Pramp](https://www.pramp.com/), I took the advice of many and read *Cracking the Coding Interview*, a book that's not all it's cracked up to be. I've searched all around and I can't find a single truly negative review about it, so I'll say it here. *Cracking the Coding Interview* sucks. It's a bad book, filled with questionable advice, overly simple problems, poorly designed solutions, and typos galore. Unfortunately, I'm basing this off the fourth edition, which was published way back in 2008. It's up to the sixth edition now, which could very well have fixed all its typos, but given the quality of the fourth edition, I'm not gonna risk wasting my time again.

Firstly, CareerCup.com is a dumb website. Its design looks like some middle schooler armed with a gradient function on Microsoft Paint and a W3Schools tutorial from 2002 somehow got access to Craigslist and turned it into a clone of Stack Overflow. Its most popular question has a grand total of 57 votes. Nobody ever capitalizes anything. I know it's not directly in the book, but it's a website just as unprofessional as the book, and I get unreasonably annoyed whenever I see CareerCup.com at the bottom of every right-sided page.

Secondly, there are way too many typos for a book in its fourth edition! Just a sampling out of many I'm sure I missed:

- "and *it's* APIs are excellent", page 8
- "Apple's interview process has minimal *beaucracy*", page 11
- "I made sure to *complement* him a lot on his work to boost his confidence", page 30
- "and *he contributing* more in discussions", page 30
- "Memorizing how to solve specific *problem* isn't going to help you", page 39
- "experienced candidates will *slightly get more* questions about their background", page 42
- "Yes, for better or worse, experienced *candidate* should expect", page 42
- "understand whether it is a *single* linked list or a doubly linked list", page 49
- "implement an algorithm which *returns node* at the beginning of the loop", page 50

And the kicker that inspired this critique in the first place: on page 47, the book asks for the time complexity of a piece of code, says it has quadratic runtime, then offers another piece of code with linear runtime. The problem is, *both pieces of code were the same!* The first piece of code should have used `String`, but both of them used `StringBuffer` and nobody caught it over four editions. Either that's pretty bad, or I should become a copy editor&hellip;

Finally, despite all its insistence on learning patterns from real interview questions and exploring new approaches to problems, the book offers very little of that. There's no coherence nor progression within the questions themselves; really, the meat of the book isn't some insider technique or problem-solving strategy, the book literally presents what it says on the cover, "150 programming interview questions and solutions". And it devotes just 46 out of 303 pages on those actual questions! This isn't a book that you can study off of for months; this is a book that you can read through in two hours and fully solve in two days!

43 pages are dedicated to dubious general advice that I'm not actually qualified to criticize; in there, there's 7 pages of ridiculous "Interview War Stories" that can't possibly help anyone with the slightest shred of modesty. Finally, you get 205 pages of solutions. These solutions contain no insight whatsoever; they get straight to the solution without showing any of the process the general advice so emphasizes. Many solutions, especially after chapter 12, come straight from Wikipedia or [livinginternet.com](http://www.livinginternet.com/)!

I have a feeling most people recommend *Cracking the Coding Interview* so much because practising interview questions is a good way to prepare, and with two days left before their interview, they happened to use this book as their source of questions. Any other source should be just as good, and not as poorly written. The only real advice I got out of the entire book was its fifth approach to finding an algorithm: think about every data structure you know, and try to shove the data into it. You can generalize this even further by thinking about every *algorithm* you know, and try to shove the problem into it. I feel that this may be good advice not only for technical interviews, but also for programming competitions in general! But, as the book so eloquently puts it, "this is hacky".


### Lacking All but the Coding Interview

I was going to make some poetic comment about how I was sick for that entire week and skipped everything except for a lab and those interviews, how I probably became sick from a nervous breakdown due to stress and sleep deprivation, and how after sacrificing my personal well-being, perhaps those coding interviews were really all I had left and I lacked everything else.

But I ran out of words from criticizing *Cracking the Coding Interview*, and now my little "gap week" has left me refreshed, enlightened, and more determined than ever before to get my life back together, so, um, maybe next month.
