---
title: None Phone Known, Done Lone Moan, Life Without a Phone
description: A fountain of regrets from Eugene Y. Q. Shen, who got a phone before 2017 February.
---

Everyone wants to be a special snowflake. For some, it's natural. For others, it takes four years and a quarter million dollars. For me, it took a decade to realize that unless you're naturally gifted, it doesn't matter how hard you force yourself to believe you're special. One day, everything will come crashing down, leaving you alone in the rubble wondering what on earth was the point of building a 1:10 replica model of UBC's seemingly nameless long fountain-waterfall out of papier-mâché. Let me tell you a few stories of my papier-mâché fountains, and how I eventually understood the futility and impermanence of such flimsical constructions.

Phones and Facebook. Imagine living with none of this.

Those are the paper-mashes I tried to mould, a life in modern society without modern social technology. No, I really did think doing so would make me a special snowflake. Yes, this is incredibly silly. That's why they're represented by paper-mash fountains.

<!--more-->

I made a Facebook account in 2007, and I don't know why. I'll likely never be able to find out why, as I lost the password soon later and the first step to recovering an account back then was to submit the fake birthday I randomly generated to elude COPPA. Even if I remembered, I wouldn't have been able to authenticate anyway, as I had no Facebook friends, never made any posts, and used a fake name, since back then, they had neither the technology to monitor nor analyze your every waking moment in preparation for the day of total subliminal control over half the world population, so they didn't need to link your online persona to your physical embodiment by stealing your true name. I didn't set up two-factor authentication either, both because it didn't exist, and because nobody would buy me a mobile phone. After guessing three birthdays every day for an entire year, I swore never to use Facebook ever again for making such stringent anti-fraud requirements as having to know my own birthday.

So that was the seed of my fountain, the cardboard skeleton of its miniature basin. Now, I remember always wanting to be a special snowflake, but I don't quite remember when I first formulated my *grand strategy* for achieving it. It was definitely way before 2007, as one of the many reasons I never got a third job in neither MapleStory nor real life was my constant switching to the newest servers in order to combat the veterans' innate advantage of time. So ingrained was my grand strategy that only while writing this post did I truly realize how silly I was: I wasn't Tiger or the former student president of the high school I would eventually go to, who wasn't four people and so had to quit college to continue grinding into the top double digits before attained enlightenment one day and becoming a supporting actor for a very popular TV show. Playing video games wasn't about rankings&mdash;you only won if you had fun, and only truly achieved victory if you didn't regret pulling an all-nighter to start the essay you should have finished. But my grand strategy dominated my mentality:

> Be the first, or not do the being-the-first-thing.

(Having had an internal monologue running nonstop since the day my mom told me to shut up, I've never had the need to think in anything but words and myopia-blurred pictures, to the point where I started to doubt whether such a feat was even possible. I'm proud to announce that today, I have concrete proof that man is indeed capable of thinking outside the box, for my grand strategy definitely started with "Be the first, or not", yet it was grammatically correct in my head.)

This post focuses on the latter clause, since you become special by being noticeably different, and not having a phone or Facebook is more noticeable than having the first phone or the first face, so my equally laughable struggles with the former clause is a story for another month. As I was there fairly early for MapleStory (Global) and RuneScape (2), I continued playing them for a while, completely ignoring my social life and shirking all my responsibilities as a ten-year-old. I knew it was irresponsible to waste so much time on gaming back then, but now I can't name anything I could have spent my time on instead, with no homework, no Netflix, and nothing to program other than graphing calculators and raw HTML, which I actually did learn for a project culminating in a cozy Freewebs page replete with falling snow and fiery cursor animations.

When high school started, pretty much everyone wanted a phone, pretty much everyone was already on Facebook, and pretty much everyone except me knew that Twitter was meant solely for marketers and antisocial nerds seeking validation within 140 characters. They were no longer children, but adventurous young adults, eagerly exploring the mysterious oceans of human social interaction. But not me, oh no, cause I wasn't the first anymore. Maybe things would have turned out differently if I wasn't so early for Kongregate, the Flash gaming site that sucked up all of my elementary years in my eternal quest to be the first. I never cared enough about anything else to realize that I was fast being forced into not doing the being-the-first-thing with respect to social entertainment, and it wasn't gonna be enough.

So I was going to do the *not*-being-the-first-thing. No longer was I abstaining from Facebook out of wrong-birthday spite. I was going to transform my not-being-the-firstness into something truly special by actively never getting a phone, never using Facebook, no matter what! The seeds were sprouting, the cardboard skeletons now enveloped in a soggy sheath of specialness.

<hr />

Back then, it seemed really tough having none of these phones. No phone meant no calls, so nobody would ever talk to me outside of school. No phone meant no texting, so nobody would ever invite me to hang out. No phone meant no data, so nobody would ask me about the latest weather when their batteries ran out and their umbrellas disintegrated and they were stuck in a labyrinth with a devilish contraption in the centre, a fountain on which floated two paper-mashy boxes so carefully positioned among the booby-trapped nozzles that one knew instinctively that taking both boxes would lead to certain permanent bodily disfigurement, where the first box contained a slightly muddy second-hand umbrella and the second a meticulously constructed ornamental fountain out of the purest pristine salt. (In such a situation knowing the acidity of the rain outside could be beneficial.)

The more I thought about all I was missing out on, the more my expectations detached from reality. Having never used a phone, I honestly had no idea what people actually did with them. For example, I never understood why people would put them in their butt pockets, ripe for the plucking by capable pocket-pickers, fully anticipating the happy surprise of becoming an uncomfortably non-gaseous silicon whoopee cushion, in the one location where taking them out is unavoidably conspicuous from all directions simultaneously. I also never understood the point of texting when all other forms of instant messaging&mdash;you know, MSN, Google Talk, shouting into a megaphone during a fire drill&mdash;were just as widely available, but free! Since most of my teachers used to ban phone use during class, and since I ran straight home to the Internet after class, I figured that I was just as available as everyone else and couldn't understand why nobody instantly messaged me. And yes, even though nowadays, Yik Yak and Hearthstone are pretty much requirements to a productive school experience, my thinking would have been flawed even if my English teacher cared about us playing StarCraft in the middle of lecture.

What I thought I was missing was the network effect. It wouldn't matter if I was always online on Jabber or IRC, cause it was too much hassle for anyone else to check. But phones are always right beside you, and the nonstop stream of notifications causes too much hassle for you *not* to check. But that's not quite true, or at least, it certainly wasn't the only thing missing. Let's see if you can find out before I can.

<hr />

One of the fountains (remember, a fountain is a metaphor for a completely useless endeavour that seemed special *in anterospect*, which sounds so much cooler than "at the time" that such a phrase ought to exist, but doesn't, and also yes I forgot about using the metaphor and yes I am ashamed that such a lame idea ever crossed my mind and yes I apologize profusely but it's too late now) that I clung onto was for several external causes, and when I noticed that these external rationalizations remained even as I gave up my grand strategy, I saw just how absurd all my other fountains were, unsupported by even the most pitiful excuses.

This fountain was driving. At first, my grand strategy held me back. Driving was for the cool kids, so it was no question that I would never get caught up in the bandwagon. I lived in Vancouver, a tiny metropolitan area with the longest automated transit system in the world (as of this post, in 2017) and an amazing bus system to boot, despite the sheltered protestations of 99 B-Line students across the city. As I wasn't there a month ago to witness its complete meltdown in face of a severe shortage of saltiness that only I could have addressed, I still rest confident in its effectiveness, and conversely, in the inefficiency and waste of driving in such a dense residential setting. This will definitely be a story for another month, but in summary: 1. bus lanes will make buses fast; 2. you can't sleep/eat/study while driving; 3. when everyone's in self-driving cars, people with no driving experience will be more safe because they'll never try to override the computer. Also that global warming thing.

The point is, when my parents finally manhandled me into the theory examination booth, I came out feeling no different. Driving was nothing special or cool. Not learning to drive wasn't a bold statement against deep-seated Chinese gender norms or against the destructive hedonism of a spoiled second generation. In fact, any decision I made was pretty normal. Stripped of its paper-mushed skin, a cause I stood up to for external reasons lay bare, with nary a single strip of sticky wet specialness left. Driving was a real, solid fountain, unlike almost everything else I was determined to avoid.

<hr />

By this time, my lack of Facebook was seriously affecting my academics. For years, groupmates had pestered me to get a Facebook account, to no avail against my unflinching wall of obstinance. Every time someone had to make an exception for me, every time an entire group had to switch over to Google Docs or Skype, every time I conveniently excused myself from troublesome responsibilities on account of "no Facebook so I didn't know", that wall just got higher, inch by inch, row by row. My grand strategy seemed to work, as Facebook approached its saturation point of everyone in the world minus me. I watched as my graduating class succumbed to the infection, as the last bastions of control freak parents relinquished their iron grip over their miserable offspring, until at last, only I was left. In my entire graduating class, I was the only person with neither Facebook nor a phone, and everybody knew it.

But nobody cared. I still wasn't special. After two terms of university collaboration, with my groups always worrying over who's turn it was to email Eugene what news from Facebook and my grades literally decimated from peer evaluations on communication skill, technical competence, and cooperative attitude, I finally gave up and activated the Facebook account formerly reserved for failing in the qualification rounds of the Facebook Hacker Cup.

But nobody cared anymore. In fact, nobody used Facebook for group projects anymore, now that actual collaboration tools like Slack and the Irving K. Barber Learning Centre exist. I had successfully rejected Facebook for so long on the premise that I would finally become a special snowflake, a heroic warrior alone against the horde of the sinister shapeless social media sirens so relentlessly seductive to the modern teenage soul. But when I gave in, there was no temptation to resist, there was no battle to be fought, there was just nothing to do on Facebook! And there's nothing impressive about struggling alone against yourself.

The glorious fountain of Facebook I had envisioned was but an empty shell of papier-mâché, alarmingly hollow, disintegrating instantly in the rain.

In the middle of last October, some family friends flew over from China for a week, bringing with them precious bags of cheap Chinese confectioneries unavailable in the West and a secondhand iPhone 5, to which the wife never turned back after experiencing the moral superiority of an open source Android platform. Thus it came to me, for free, and I spent the next two months desperately wishing that my parents would stop calling me in the middle of club meetings. Living at home with my parents, I just didn't need a phone, and wanted to think myself too pure to own one.

But alas, now I am in France, and well, of course, my phone has become absolutely, completely, unquestionably&hellip; unessential to any aspect of my daily life. Yes, unessential. Unnecessary. Unneeded. It's a glorified paper map, not some miracle of social engineering that transmogrifies awkward introverts into functioning members of society. The only things I do with it are check the time, call WeChat with my parents, and follow Google Maps, which somehow knows where I am even without data. Nobody texts anymore. Nobody uses Snapchat. All that mindless socializing was for high school students, and I missed my chance.

I know the exact moment I left my grand strategy forever. It was exactly three days ago, as I was crawling alone in the dark cobbled streets of a foreign land, seeking my lost wallet. As the water that was from the rain and not salty at all dripped from my cheeks, I might have seen those mushy fountains dissolve right in front of my eyes if I had come up with the metaphor before then, but probably not, cause it really is a terrible metaphor.

What reason anymore was there to continue pretending to avoid phones and Facebook? I thought and thought, but unlike driving, these fountains were baseless, basinless things, more ridiculous than a soluble 1:10 replica model of the University Boulevard cascading water feature ever could be. Maybe I set myself up to fail, knowing that I would become so socially inept that I would have to doublethink myself into believing that I truly wanted to be a special snowflake, when really all I wanted was something to blame, however abstract, for my self-fulfilling interpersonal inadequacy. Surely you've figured out by now why nobody wanted to talk to me. It wasn't because I was unavailable on popular social networks. It wasn't because I didn't send anyone snaps or tweets. It was all my own fault, and I made up silly papier-mâché fountains to blame for it. Now that I've finally confronted the inanity of avoiding phones and Facebook for a decade, perhaps I can honestly start bettering myself.

But that's a story for next month.
