---
title: "Starting Late, Going Late, Being Late: Two Stories of Procrastination"
description: Two stories of Eugene Y. Q. Shen's lateness, published months later in 2017 January.
---

Author's note: it is February first and all I have done every day in 2017 is 1. wake up 2. eat breakfast 3. go to work 4. make dinner 5. watch a movie while eating dinner 6. sleep because the commute is an hour long and I've never cooked before and I eat very slowly and when I'm watching a movie I eat very *very* slowly, so I dug around and realized that I only had one post pre-written which is this one from 2016 September, which ironically is about my dedication to conquer lateness, but now I'm publishing it late because the lateness has not yet been conquered by me, as evidenced by the fact that I have never for once been on time to work. Enjoy.

If there really are any higher powers out there, they're trying to tell me something. I think it boils down to, "Stop being late!"

So I will. Today is the day after which I shall never be late again. (As proof, consider the fact that I'm writing this post *before* the last day of the month!) But first, why would I make such an absurd claim? Why would any of you care? And what really happened in these past two days? The answers to these questions are: because of what happened in these past two days; because actually, you shouldn't care at all; and&hellip;

<!--more-->

Sunday morning, 10:00 a.m. I woke up bright and early as usual to go through all the lectures of the past two weeks, none of which I paid any attention to because I just had five months of summer vacation and I just can't school. After that, I would organize my email inbox, which still has over 200 presumably important unread emails, with an average of 10 emails a day. I had an intake interview with [UBC Rocket](http://www.ubcrocket.com/), a super cool and super new engineering design team, but that wasn't until 2:30, so I wasn't worried about time. But as I later started to comb through my email, I realized that UBC Rocket never sent me anything about my interview time. I searched around and around and eventually found the original Doodle poll in my history, and its latest appointment slot was for 12:20. It would take me almost an hour to get to UBC on a weekend. It was 11:40.

So I sprinted to the bus stop, waited for the bus for like ten hours as usual, and made it to the interview at 12:40. That was my first lateness. Thankfully, the club execs were still interviewing other people when I got there, so nobody knew that I was late except one guy who missed his interview in the morning and rescheduled it after mine. The interview went well and I felt pretty good about my luck, so I leisurely strolled to lunch. I had a mandatory fire extinguisher training session at 1:30, but it wouldn't take me an entire hour to eat lunch, right?

Wrong! First, I forgot that my interview actually started at probably 12:45, and maybe even ended past 1:00. Second, I forgot about the email about the training session, which was buried under those 200 unread emails I didn't sort through that morning. Third, I forgot to read that email, which had the location of the training session: the UBC fire hall, half an hour away from the rest of campus!

At this point I was just devastated. This was the last training session offered this term, so if I didn't make it on time, I would be barred from all chemistry laboratories until at least January. I sprinted to the fire hall and got there maybe 20 minutes late, but I was too ashamed to enter the training classroom and just listened to the presentation from outside the door. That was my second lateness. Thankfully, the chemistry safety coordinator still let me participate in the practical training, which was a lot of fun. She was exceptionally kind and explained to me where I could read up on all the information I missed, when honestly, I expected her to just kick me out of the fire hall! Either way, it was rude and disrespectful of me to be late and I spent the rest of the day bubbling in shamefaced disgrace.

Monday morning, 1:30 a.m. I had just finished my math homework after spending an unreasonable amount of time implementing the Edmonds&ndash;Karp algorithm to distract myself from the earlier events of the day. I have a weird Monday schedule; since I have a music tutorial block at 1:00 p.m. and the math department doesn't allow any conflicts where you miss math classes, I had to switch my math class from 1:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m., but since most of my cohort takes the 1:00 p.m. class, I usually go there and skip my 9:00 a.m. class instead (take that, math department that doesn't let me officially skip math classes). At the same time, there's an interesting 20th-century music class from 8:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. in which I often sit in, and I'm scheduled to volunteer at a chemistry lab (for which I needed that fire extinguisher training) from 9:30 a.m. onwards. So I've got two conflicting events with the math class I'm officially registered in, but almost never attend. Anyway, as I got into bed, I wasn't considering any of that when I fell asleep on the spot.

Monday morning, 7:50 a.m. Now I definitely was considering all of that. I guess I was weekend-lagged&mdash;waking up at 10:00 a.m. changing to waking up at 7:00 a.m. is the same as the jetlag from Vancouver to Toronto&mdash;but there was no way I could make it on time to the math class I never attend. That wouldn't usually matter, but I stayed up so late finishing that math homework because I had to hand it in! So I, once again, sprinted to the bus stop, waited for the bus for three days and three nights, and got to class at 9:20 a.m. because rush hour buses are slow (so I [8:00 a.m. classes](/blogs/1608-first-year/) instead). Since I had an optional computer engineering lab due at 10:00 a.m., which I forgot about, I decided not to interrupt the class and went to the library to work on that instead; hopefully, I'd sneak up to the prof at the end of the class and persuade him to accept my late assignment then. By 9:45 a.m., I should have left, but I was so close to finishing the lab that I stayed in until 9:55 a.m., when I finally submitted my final code. By the time I got back to the class, the flood of math students became a flood of chemistry students.

Author's note: I have absolutely no idea what happened next nor recollection of what happened the second day because it was four months ago. This was a stupid post.
